linux_intermediate/solutions.rst, before:


Solutions to the Exercises
==========================

TAR & GZIP
----------

1. Use :index:`gzip <gzip>` to compress the file P12931.txt

   ::

    $ gzip P12931.txt

2. Decompress the resulting file P12931.txt.gz (revert previous command)

   ::

    $ gunzip P12931.txt.gz  

   or 

   :: 

    $ gzip -d P12931.txt.gz

3. Use :index:`tar <tar>` to create an archive containing all fasta files in the current directory into an archive called "fastafiles.tar"

   ::

    $ tar -c -f fastafiles.tar *.fasta


4. Use gzip to compress the archive "fastafiles.tar"

   ::

    $ gzip fastafiles.tar

5. How can you achieve the two previous steps "using tar to create archive" and "gzip the archive" in one command? 

   ::

    $ tar -c -z -f fastafiles.tar.gz *.fasta  

.. note:: 
      Note the ``-z``

6. Test (list the contents of) the compressed archive "fastafiles.tar.gz"

   ::

    $ tar -tf fastafiles.tar.gz

7. Download the compressed PDB file for entry 1Y57 from rcsb.org (eg. ``wget "http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/files/1Y57.pdb.gz"``) and decompress it. 

   ::

    $ wget "http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/files/1Y57.pdb.gz"
    $ gunzip 1Y57.pdb.gz

 
GREP
----

1. Which of the DNA files ENST0* contains "TATATCTAA" as part of the sequence? 

   ::

    $ grep "TATATCTAA" ENST0*
    ENST00000380152.fasta:ACGGAAGAATGTGAGAAAAATAAGCAGGACACAATTACAACTAAAAAATATATCTAA
    ENST00000544455.fasta:ACGGAAGAATGTGAGAAAAATAAGCAGGACACAATTACAACTAAAAAATATATCTAA

2. List only the names of the DNA files ENST0* that contain "CAACAAA" as part of the sequence.

   ::

    $ grep -l "CAACAAA" ENST0*
    ENST00000380152.fasta
    ENST00000544455.fasta

3. Considering the previous example, would you consider grep a suitable tool to perform motif searches? Why not? Try to find the pattern "CAACAAA" by manual inspection of the first three lines of each sequence.

.. note:: Answer: When using grep as a motif searching tool, you need to keep in mind that grep (like sed and awk) is line-oriented, meaning that by default it only searches for a given motif in a single line. In the given example, upon manual inspection you will find the given motif also in the file ENST00000530893.fasta (spanning multiple lines), which grep missed. 
   You would need to think about how to do multi-line searches (eg. Removing line-breaks etc.)

4. Count the number of 'ATOM's in the file 1Y57.pdb
   
   ::

    $ grep -c ATOM 1Y57.pdb
    3632

5. Does this number agree with the annotated number of atoms? The PDB file has a comment which tells you how many atoms there are annotated in this file. This comment can be found by searching for the term "protein atoms" (use quotes and case insensitive search here!).

   ::

    $ grep -i "protein atoms" 1Y57.pdb
    REMARK   3   PROTEIN ATOMS            : 3600

   This tells us that there are 3600 atoms annotated in this PDB file, however we initially counted 3632. This is because grep also counted any occurrence of "ATOM" within REMARKS. We can avoid this by either filtering out the remarks:

   ::

    $ grep -v REMARK 1Y57.pdb | grep -c ATOM
    3600

   ...or by telling grep to only count those lines that start with "ATOM":

   ::

    $ grep -c ^ATOM 1Y57.pdb 
    3600


REV
---

1. By combining ``rev`` with the ``cut`` tool, print the last word of each line in DNA.txt. Make sure that the words are readable when they are printed out.

   ::

    $ rev DNA.txt | cut -d' ' -f1 | rev
    the
    known
    of
    life.
    adenine,
    DNA
    [...]


XARGS
-----

1. Use ``xargs`` to print the first line of the files listed in to_be_previewed.txt

   ::

    $ cat to_be_previewed.txt | xargs head -n1
    ==> 3UA7.pdb <==
    HEADER    TRANSFERASE/VIRAL PROTEIN               21-OCT-11   3UA7              
    
    ==> ENST00000380152.fasta <==
    >ENSG00000139618:ENST00000380152 cds:KNOWN_protein_coding
    
    ==> ENST00000530893.fasta <==
    >ENSG00000139618:ENST00000530893 cds:KNOWN_protein_coding
    [...]

2. Create a copy of each of these files by passing the lines in to_be_copied.txt two-at-a-time to ``cp``

   ::

    $ ls -1t *.{pdb,txt,fasta}
    to_be_copied.txt
    to_be_previewed.txt
    tabular_data.txt
    twoseqs.fasta
    files.txt
    motifs.txt
    1Y57.pdb
    3UA7.pdb
    DNA.fasta
    [...]
    $ cat to_be_copied.txt | xargs -n2 cp
    $ ls -1t *.{pdb,txt,fasta}
    sequenceA.fasta
    sequenceB.fasta
    sequenceC.fasta
    sequenceD.fasta
    sequenceE.fasta
    structure.pdb
    text.txt
    to_be_copied.txt
    to_be_previewed.txt
    [...]

3. A better way to back up these files might be to keep the original names while copying them. Make another copy of each file listed in to_be_previewed.txt, adding ".backup" onto the end of each filename. (Hint: remember the "-I" option!)

   ::

    $ cat to_be_previewed.txt | xargs -I FILENAME cp FILENAME FILENAME.backup
    $ ls -1 *.backup
    3UA7.pdb.backup
    ENST00000380152.fasta.backup
    ENST00000530893.fasta.backup
    ENST00000544455.fasta.backup
    P04062.fasta.backup
    P05480.fasta.backup
    P12931.fasta.backup
    PROTEINS.txt.backup


4. ADVANCED: clean up all these new files by combining the ``find`` tool with ``xargs`` and ``rm`` to search for and delete all files in the current directory that were last modified less than ten minutes ago. BE CAREFUL! (Hint: you'll need to check out the options available for ``find``, and you might consider using the "-p" option with ``xargs`` to help avoid accidentally deleting something that you might regret!)

   ::

    $ find . -type f -mtime -10m | xargs -p rm
    

SED
---

1. Use sed to print only those lines that contain "version" in the files P05480.txt and P04062.txt

   ::

    $ sed "/version/p"  P05480.txt P04062.txt 

2. Use sed to change the text "sequence version 3" to "sequence version 4" in the files P05480.txt and P04062.txt (without actually changing the files, just printing) 

   ::

    $ sed "s/sequence version 3/sequence version 4/" P05480.txt P04062.txt 

3. Use sed to update the text "sequence version 3" to "sequence version 4" in the files P05480.txt and P04062.txt (this time, make the changes directly in the files) 

   ::

    $ sed -i.bak "s/sequence version 3/sequence version 4/" P05480.txt P04062.txt 

4. Replace (transliterate) all occurrences of "r" by "l" and "l" by "r" (at the same time) in the file PROTEINS.txt (so that "structural" becomes "stluctular") 

   ::

    $ sed "y/rRlL/lLrR/" PROTEINS.txt


AWK
---

1. Use awk to print only those lines that contain "version" in the files P12931.txt and P05480.txt and think about how this procedure is different to sed. 

   ::

    $ awk "/version/ {print}" P12931.txt P05480.txt

This is very similar to sed, you also have to use the slashes "/" to define the search pattern. However the sed notation is a little more concise...

2. For all FASTA files that begin with "P" ("P*.fasta") print only the second item of the header (split on "|") eg. for ">sp|P12931|SRC_HUMAN Proto-oncogene", print only "P12931"

   ::

    $ awk -F"|" '/>/ {print $2}' P*.fasta

3. The file "P12931.csv" contains phosphorylation sites in the protein P12931. (If the file "P12931.csv" does not exist, use ``wget http://phospho.elm.eu.org/byAccession/P12931.csv`` to download it ). 

   a. Column three of this file lists the amino acid position of the phosphorylation site. You are only interested in position 17 of the protein. Try to use "grep" to filter out all these lines containing "17". ::
 
      $ grep 17 P12931.csv 

   b. Now use awk to show all lines containing "17". ::
 
      $ awk "/17/ {print}" P12931.csv 

   c. Next try show only those lines where column three equals 17 (Hint: The file is semicolon-separated...). ::
 
      $ awk -F";" '$3==17 {print}' P12931.csv 

   d. Finally print the PMIDs (column 6) of all lines that contain "17" in column 3. ::
 
      $  awk -F';' '$3==17 {print $6}' P12931.csv 


Quoting and Escaping
--------------------

1. Familiarize yourself with quoting and escaping.

 a. Run the following commands to see the difference between single and double quotes when expanding variables:

  ::

    $ echo "$HOSTNAME"
    ...
    $ echo '$HOSTNAME'

 b. Next, use ssh to login to a different machine to run the same command there, again using both quoting methods:

  ::

    $ ssh pc-atcteach01 'echo $HOSTNAME'
    ...
    $ ssh pc-atcteach01 "echo $HOSTNAME"

2. Closely inspect the results; is that what you were expecting? Discuss this with your neighbour.

Commit message:

changed find+xargs exercise to a safer version!

linux_intermediate/solutions.rst, after:


Solutions to the Exercises
==========================

TAR & GZIP
----------

1. Use :index:`gzip <gzip>` to compress the file P12931.txt

   ::

    $ gzip P12931.txt

2. Decompress the resulting file P12931.txt.gz (revert previous command)

   ::

    $ gunzip P12931.txt.gz  

   or 

   :: 

    $ gzip -d P12931.txt.gz

3. Use :index:`tar <tar>` to create an archive containing all fasta files in the current directory into an archive called "fastafiles.tar"

   ::

    $ tar -c -f fastafiles.tar *.fasta


4. Use gzip to compress the archive "fastafiles.tar"

   ::

    $ gzip fastafiles.tar

5. How can you achieve the two previous steps "using tar to create archive" and "gzip the archive" in one command? 

   ::

    $ tar -c -z -f fastafiles.tar.gz *.fasta  

.. note:: 
      Note the ``-z``

6. Test (list the contents of) the compressed archive "fastafiles.tar.gz"

   ::

    $ tar -tf fastafiles.tar.gz

7. Download the compressed PDB file for entry 1Y57 from rcsb.org (eg. ``wget "http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/files/1Y57.pdb.gz"``) and decompress it. 

   ::

    $ wget "http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/files/1Y57.pdb.gz"
    $ gunzip 1Y57.pdb.gz

 
GREP
----

1. Which of the DNA files ENST0* contains "TATATCTAA" as part of the sequence? 

   ::

    $ grep "TATATCTAA" ENST0*
    ENST00000380152.fasta:ACGGAAGAATGTGAGAAAAATAAGCAGGACACAATTACAACTAAAAAATATATCTAA
    ENST00000544455.fasta:ACGGAAGAATGTGAGAAAAATAAGCAGGACACAATTACAACTAAAAAATATATCTAA

2. List only the names of the DNA files ENST0* that contain "CAACAAA" as part of the sequence.

   ::

    $ grep -l "CAACAAA" ENST0*
    ENST00000380152.fasta
    ENST00000544455.fasta

3. Considering the previous example, would you consider grep a suitable tool to perform motif searches? Why not? Try to find the pattern "CAACAAA" by manual inspection of the first three lines of each sequence.

.. note:: Answer: When using grep as a motif searching tool, you need to keep in mind that grep (like sed and awk) is line-oriented, meaning that by default it only searches for a given motif in a single line. In the given example, upon manual inspection you will find the given motif also in the file ENST00000530893.fasta (spanning multiple lines), which grep missed. 
   You would need to think about how to do multi-line searches (eg. Removing line-breaks etc.)

4. Count the number of 'ATOM's in the file 1Y57.pdb
   
   ::

    $ grep -c ATOM 1Y57.pdb
    3632

5. Does this number agree with the annotated number of atoms? The PDB file has a comment which tells you how many atoms there are annotated in this file. This comment can be found by searching for the term "protein atoms" (use quotes and case insensitive search here!).

   ::

    $ grep -i "protein atoms" 1Y57.pdb
    REMARK   3   PROTEIN ATOMS            : 3600

   This tells us that there are 3600 atoms annotated in this PDB file, however we initially counted 3632. This is because grep also counted any occurrence of "ATOM" within REMARKS. We can avoid this by either filtering out the remarks:

   ::

    $ grep -v REMARK 1Y57.pdb | grep -c ATOM
    3600

   ...or by telling grep to only count those lines that start with "ATOM":

   ::

    $ grep -c ^ATOM 1Y57.pdb 
    3600


REV
---

1. By combining ``rev`` with the ``cut`` tool, print the last word of each line in DNA.txt. Make sure that the words are readable when they are printed out.

   ::

    $ rev DNA.txt | cut -d' ' -f1 | rev
    the
    known
    of
    life.
    adenine,
    DNA
    [...]


XARGS
-----

1. Use ``xargs`` to print the first line of the files listed in to_be_previewed.txt

   ::

    $ cat to_be_previewed.txt | xargs head -n1
    ==> 3UA7.pdb <==
    HEADER    TRANSFERASE/VIRAL PROTEIN               21-OCT-11   3UA7              
    
    ==> ENST00000380152.fasta <==
    >ENSG00000139618:ENST00000380152 cds:KNOWN_protein_coding
    
    ==> ENST00000530893.fasta <==
    >ENSG00000139618:ENST00000530893 cds:KNOWN_protein_coding
    [...]

2. Create a copy of each of these files by passing the lines in to_be_copied.txt two-at-a-time to ``cp``

   ::

    $ ls -1t *.{pdb,txt,fasta}
    to_be_copied.txt
    to_be_previewed.txt
    tabular_data.txt
    twoseqs.fasta
    files.txt
    motifs.txt
    1Y57.pdb
    3UA7.pdb
    DNA.fasta
    [...]
    $ cat to_be_copied.txt | xargs -n2 cp
    $ ls -1t *.{pdb,txt,fasta}
    sequenceA.fasta
    sequenceB.fasta
    sequenceC.fasta
    sequenceD.fasta
    sequenceE.fasta
    structure.pdb
    text.txt
    to_be_copied.txt
    to_be_previewed.txt
    [...]

3. A better way to back up these files might be to keep the original names while copying them. Make another copy of each file listed in to_be_previewed.txt, adding ".backup" onto the end of each filename. (Hint: remember the "-I" option!)

   ::

    $ cat to_be_previewed.txt | xargs -I FILENAME cp FILENAME FILENAME.backup
    $ ls -1 *.backup
    3UA7.pdb.backup
    ENST00000380152.fasta.backup
    ENST00000530893.fasta.backup
    ENST00000544455.fasta.backup
    P04062.fasta.backup
    P05480.fasta.backup
    P12931.fasta.backup
    PROTEINS.txt.backup


4. ADVANCED: we've made a bit of a mess now, and it's time to clean up. Make a new directory called 'garbage' and move all these new files into it by combining the ``find`` tool with ``xargs`` and ``mv`` to search for and delete all files in the current directory that were last modified less than ten minutes ago. BE CAREFUL! (Hint: you'll need to check out the options available for ``find``, and you might consider using the "-p" option with ``xargs`` to help avoid accidentally deleting something that you might regret!) Once you've moved the files, check the contents of the 'garbage' directory and, if you're sure that you don't want any of those files anymore, delete them and the directory.

   ::

    $ mkdir garbage
    $ find . -type f -mtime -10m | xargs -I FILENAME -p mv FILENAME garbage/
    $ ls garbage
    # either (risky but quicker)
    $ rm -r garbage
    # or (safer but slower)
    $ rm -ri garbage/*
    $ rmdir garbage
    

SED
---

1. Use sed to print only those lines that contain "version" in the files P05480.txt and P04062.txt

   ::

    $ sed "/version/p"  P05480.txt P04062.txt 

2. Use sed to change the text "sequence version 3" to "sequence version 4" in the files P05480.txt and P04062.txt (without actually changing the files, just printing) 

   ::

    $ sed "s/sequence version 3/sequence version 4/" P05480.txt P04062.txt 

3. Use sed to update the text "sequence version 3" to "sequence version 4" in the files P05480.txt and P04062.txt (this time, make the changes directly in the files) 

   ::

    $ sed -i.bak "s/sequence version 3/sequence version 4/" P05480.txt P04062.txt 

4. Replace (transliterate) all occurrences of "r" by "l" and "l" by "r" (at the same time) in the file PROTEINS.txt (so that "structural" becomes "stluctular") 

   ::

    $ sed "y/rRlL/lLrR/" PROTEINS.txt


AWK
---

1. Use awk to print only those lines that contain "version" in the files P12931.txt and P05480.txt and think about how this procedure is different to sed. 

   ::

    $ awk "/version/ {print}" P12931.txt P05480.txt

This is very similar to sed, you also have to use the slashes "/" to define the search pattern. However the sed notation is a little more concise...

2. For all FASTA files that begin with "P" ("P*.fasta") print only the second item of the header (split on "|") eg. for ">sp|P12931|SRC_HUMAN Proto-oncogene", print only "P12931"

   ::

    $ awk -F"|" '/>/ {print $2}' P*.fasta

3. The file "P12931.csv" contains phosphorylation sites in the protein P12931. (If the file "P12931.csv" does not exist, use ``wget http://phospho.elm.eu.org/byAccession/P12931.csv`` to download it ). 

   a. Column three of this file lists the amino acid position of the phosphorylation site. You are only interested in position 17 of the protein. Try to use "grep" to filter out all these lines containing "17". ::
 
      $ grep 17 P12931.csv 

   b. Now use awk to show all lines containing "17". ::
 
      $ awk "/17/ {print}" P12931.csv 

   c. Next try show only those lines where column three equals 17 (Hint: The file is semicolon-separated...). ::
 
      $ awk -F";" '$3==17 {print}' P12931.csv 

   d. Finally print the PMIDs (column 6) of all lines that contain "17" in column 3. ::
 
      $  awk -F';' '$3==17 {print $6}' P12931.csv 


Quoting and Escaping
--------------------

1. Familiarize yourself with quoting and escaping.

 a. Run the following commands to see the difference between single and double quotes when expanding variables:

  ::

    $ echo "$HOSTNAME"
    ...
    $ echo '$HOSTNAME'

 b. Next, use ssh to login to a different machine to run the same command there, again using both quoting methods:

  ::

    $ ssh pc-atcteach01 'echo $HOSTNAME'
    ...
    $ ssh pc-atcteach01 "echo $HOSTNAME"

2. Closely inspect the results; is that what you were expecting? Discuss this with your neighbour.
