sphinx_beginner/links.rst, before:


Links and Further Information
------------------------------

Links 
^^^^^^

- A full 500 page book about the Linux commandline for free(!): `LinuxCommand.org <http://linuxcommand.org/>`_ [#l1]_
- Another nice introduction: `"A beginner's guide to UNIX/Linux" <http://www.mn.uio.no/astro/english/services/it/help/basic-services/linux/guide.html>`_ [#l2]_
- The "*commandline starter*" chapter of an O'Reilly book: `Learning Debian GNU/Linux - Issuing Linux Commands <http://oreilly.com/openbook/debian/book/ch04_01.html>`_ [#l3]_
- A nice introduction to Linux/UNIX file permissions: `"chmod Tutorial" <http://www.catcode.com/teachmod/>`_ [#l4]_
- `Linux Cheatsheets <http://www.cheat-sheets.org/#Linux>`_ [#l5]_
- For the technically interested:
  `Linux Filesystem Hierarchy Standard <http://www.pathname.com/fhs/>`_ [#l6]_ and 
  `Linux Standard Base <http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/lsb>`_ [#l7]_
- `Unix commands applied to bioinformatics <http://rous.mit.edu/index.php/Unix_commands_applied_to_bioinformatics>`_ [#l8]_
- `BioPieces <http://code.google.com/p/biopieces>`_ [#l9]_ are a collection of bioinformatics tools that can be pieced together in a very easy and flexible manner to perform both simple and complex tasks.
- `Google shell style guide <https://code.google.com/p/google-styleguide>`_ [#20]_
- `Useful bash one-liners for bioinformatics <https://github.com/stephenturner/oneliners>`_ [#21]_
- Interactive explanation of your commandline: `Explain Shell <http://www.explainshell.com>`_ [#22]_



Real printed paper books:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Dietz, M., "*Praxiskurs Unix-Shell*", O'Reilly (highly recommended!)
- Herold, H., "*awk & sed*", Addison-Wesley
- Robbins, A., "*sed & awk Pocket Reference*", O'Reilly
- Robbins, A. and Beebe, N., "*Classic Shell Scripting*", O'Reilly
- Siever, E. et al., "*Linux in a Nutshell*", O'Reilly


Live - CDs
^^^^^^^^^^

A Live-CD is a complete bootable computer operating system which runs in the computer's
memory, rather than loading from the hard disk drive. It allows users to experience and evaluate an
operating system without installing it or making any changes to the existing operating system on the
computer.

Just download an ISO-Image, burn it onto a CD/DVD and insert it into your DVD-Drive to boot
your computer with Linux!

Fedora Live CD 
"""""""""""""""
This Live CD contains everything the `Fedora <http://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FedoraLiveCD>`_ [#c1]_ Linux operating system has to offer and it's everything
you need to try out Fedora - you don't have to erase anything on your current system to try it out,
and it won't put your files at risk. Take Fedora for a test drive, and if you like it, you can install
Fedora directly to your hard drive straight from the Live Media desktop.

Knoppix 
""""""""
`Knoppix <http://knopper.net/knoppix>`_ [#c2]_  is an operating system based on Debian designed to be run directly from a CD / DVD or a
USB flash drive, one of the first of its kind for any operating system. When starting a program, it is
loaded from the removable medium and decompressed into a RAM drive. The decompression is
transparent and on-the-fly. More than 1000 software packages are included on the CD edition and
more than 2600 are included on the DVD edition. Up to 9 gigabytes can be stored on the DVD in
compressed form.

BioKnoppix 
"""""""""""
`Bioknoppix <http://bioknoppix.hpcf.upr.edu>`_ [#c3]_ is a customized distribution of Knoppix Linux Live CD. With this distribution you just
boot from the CD and you have a fully functional Linux OS with open source applications targeted
for the molecular biologist. Beside using RAM, Bioknoppix doesn't touch the host computer, being
ideal for demonstrations, molecular biology students, workshops, etc.

Vigyaan 
""""""""
`Vigyaan <http://www.vigyaancd.org>`_ [#c4]_ is an electronic workbench for bioinformatics, computational biology and computational
chemistry. It has been designed to meet the needs of both beginners and experts.

BioSlax 
""""""""
`BioSLAX <http://www.bioslax.com>`_ [#c5]_ is a live CD/DVD suite of bioinformatics tools that has been released by the resource team
of the BioInformatics Center (BIC), National University of Singapore (NUS).


 .. [#l1] `http://linuxcommand.org/ <http://linuxcommand.org/>`_
 .. [#l2] `http://www.mn.uio.no/astro/english/services/it/help/basic-services/linux/guide.html <http://www.mn.uio.no/astro/english/services/it/help/basic-services/linux/guide.html>`_
 .. [#l3] `http://oreilly.com/openbook/debian/book/ch04_01.html <http://oreilly.com/openbook/debian/book/ch04_01.html>`_
 .. [#l4] `http://www.catcode.com/teachmod/ <http://www.catcode.com/teachmod/>`_
 .. [#l5] `http://www.cheat-sheets.org/#Linux <http://www.cheat-sheets.org/#Linux>`_
 .. [#l6] `http://www.pathname.com/fhs/ <http://www.pathname.com/fhs/>`_
 .. [#l7] `http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/lsb <http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/lsb>`_
 .. [#l8] `http://rous.mit.edu/index.php/Unix_commands_applied_to_bioinformatics <http://rous.mit.edu/index.php/Unix_commands_applied_to_bioinformatics>`_
 .. [#l9] `http://code.google.com/p/biopieces <http://code.google.com/p/biopieces>`_
 .. [#20] `https://code.google.com/p/google-styleguide <https://code.google.com/p/google-styleguide>`_
 .. [#21] `https://github.com/stephenturner/oneliners <https://github.com/stephenturner/oneliners>`_
 .. [#22] `http://www.explainshell.com <http://www.explainshell.com>`_

 .. [#c1] `http://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FedoraLiveCD <http://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FedoraLiveCD>`_
 .. [#c2] `http://knopper.net/knoppix  <http://knopper.net/knoppix>`_
 .. [#c3] `http://bioknoppix.hpcf.upr.edu <http://bioknoppix.hpcf.upr.edu>`_
 .. [#c4] `http://www.vigyaancd.org  <http://www.vigyaancd.org>`_
 .. [#c5] `http://www.bioslax.com <http://www.bioslax.com>`_

Commit message:

update links; add clmystery add curly braces to shell globs bounce version

sphinx_beginner/links.rst, after:


Links and Further Information
------------------------------

Links 
^^^^^^

- A full 500 page book about the Linux commandline for free(!): `LinuxCommand.org <http://linuxcommand.org/>`_ [#l1]_
- Another nice introduction: `"A beginner's guide to UNIX/Linux" <http://www.mn.uio.no/astro/english/services/it/help/basic-services/linux/guide.html>`_ [#l2]_
- The "*commandline starter*" chapter of an O'Reilly book: `Learning Debian GNU/Linux - Issuing Linux Commands <http://oreilly.com/openbook/debian/book/ch04_01.html>`_ [#l3]_
- A nice introduction to Linux/UNIX file permissions: `"chmod Tutorial" <http://www.catcode.com/teachmod/>`_ [#l4]_
- `Linux Cheatsheets <http://www.cheat-sheets.org/#linux>`_ [#l5]_
- For the technically interested:
  `Linux Filesystem Hierarchy Standard <http://www.pathname.com/fhs/>`_ [#l6]_ and 
  `Linux Standard Base <http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/lsb>`_ [#l7]_
- `Unix commands applied to bioinformatics <http://rous.mit.edu/index.php/Unix_commands_applied_to_bioinformatics>`_ [#l8]_
- `BioPieces <http://code.google.com/p/biopieces>`_ [#l9]_ are a collection of bioinformatics tools that can be pieced together in a very easy and flexible manner to perform both simple and complex tasks.
- `Google shell style guide <https://code.google.com/p/google-styleguide>`_ [#l10]_
- `Useful bash one-liners for bioinformatics <https://github.com/stephenturner/oneliners>`_ [#l11]_
- Interactive explanation of your commandline: `Explain Shell <http://www.explainshell.com>`_ [#l12]_


Command Line Mystery Game
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


`CLMystery <https://github.com/veltman/clmystery>`_ [#l13]_ is a game that you play on the commandline: There's been a murder in Terminal City, and TCPD needs your help to solve this crime
*by using commandline tools only*!

To play the game, get the files from github and read the instructions:

 :: 

  wget https://github.com/veltman/clmystery/archive/master.zip
  unzip master.zip
  cd clmystery-master/
  cat instructions


Real printed paper books
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Dietz, M., "*Praxiskurs Unix-Shell*", O'Reilly (highly recommended!, german language only)
- Herold, H., "*awk & sed*", Addison-Wesley
- Robbins, A., "*sed & awk Pocket Reference*", O'Reilly
- Robbins, A. and Beebe, N., "*Classic Shell Scripting*", O'Reilly
- Siever, E. et al., "*Linux in a Nutshell*", O'Reilly


Live - CDs
^^^^^^^^^^

A Live-CD is a complete bootable computer operating system which runs in the computer's
memory, rather than loading from the hard disk drive. It allows users to experience and evaluate an
operating system without installing it or making any changes to the existing operating system on the
computer.

Just download an ISO-Image, burn it onto a CD/DVD and insert it into your DVD-Drive to boot
your computer with Linux!

Fedora Live CD 
"""""""""""""""
This Live CD contains everything the `Fedora <http://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FedoraLiveCD>`_ [#c1]_ Linux operating system has to offer and it's everything
you need to try out Fedora - you don't have to erase anything on your current system to try it out,
and it won't put your files at risk. Take Fedora for a test drive, and if you like it, you can install
Fedora directly to your hard drive straight from the Live Media desktop.

Knoppix 
""""""""
`Knoppix <http://knopper.net/knoppix>`_ [#c2]_  is an operating system based on Debian designed to be run directly from a CD / DVD or a
USB flash drive, one of the first of its kind for any operating system. When starting a program, it is
loaded from the removable medium and decompressed into a RAM drive. The decompression is
transparent and on-the-fly. More than 1000 software packages are included on the CD edition and
more than 2600 are included on the DVD edition. Up to 9 gigabytes can be stored on the DVD in
compressed form.

BioKnoppix 
"""""""""""
`Bioknoppix <http://bioknoppix.hpcf.upr.edu>`_ [#c3]_ is a customized distribution of Knoppix Linux Live CD. With this distribution you just
boot from the CD and you have a fully functional Linux OS with open source applications targeted
for the molecular biologist. Beside using RAM, Bioknoppix doesn't touch the host computer, being
ideal for demonstrations, molecular biology students, workshops, etc.

Vigyaan 
""""""""
`Vigyaan <http://www.vigyaancd.org>`_ [#c4]_ is an electronic workbench for bioinformatics, computational biology and computational
chemistry. It has been designed to meet the needs of both beginners and experts.

BioSlax 
""""""""
`BioSLAX <http://www.bioslax.com>`_ [#c5]_ is a live CD/DVD suite of bioinformatics tools that has been released by the resource team
of the BioInformatics Center (BIC), National University of Singapore (NUS).


 .. [#l1] `http://linuxcommand.org/ <http://linuxcommand.org/>`_
 .. [#l2] `http://www.mn.uio.no/astro/english/services/it/help/basic-services/linux/guide.html <http://www.mn.uio.no/astro/english/services/it/help/basic-services/linux/guide.html>`_
 .. [#l3] `http://oreilly.com/openbook/debian/book/ch04_01.html <http://oreilly.com/openbook/debian/book/ch04_01.html>`_
 .. [#l4] `http://www.catcode.com/teachmod/ <http://www.catcode.com/teachmod/>`_
 .. [#l5] `http://www.cheat-sheets.org/#linux <http://www.cheat-sheets.org/#linux>`_
 .. [#l6] `http://www.pathname.com/fhs/ <http://www.pathname.com/fhs/>`_
 .. [#l7] `http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/lsb <http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/lsb>`_
 .. [#l8] `http://rous.mit.edu/index.php/Unix_commands_applied_to_bioinformatics <http://rous.mit.edu/index.php/Unix_commands_applied_to_bioinformatics>`_
 .. [#l9] `http://code.google.com/p/biopieces <http://code.google.com/p/biopieces>`_
 .. [#l10] `https://code.google.com/p/google-styleguide <https://code.google.com/p/google-styleguide>`_
 .. [#l11] `https://github.com/stephenturner/oneliners <https://github.com/stephenturner/oneliners>`_
 .. [#l12] `http://www.explainshell.com <http://www.explainshell.com>`_
 .. [#l13] `https://github.com/veltman/clmystery <https://github.com/veltman/clmystery>`_

 .. [#c1] `http://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FedoraLiveCD <http://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FedoraLiveCD>`_
 .. [#c2] `http://knopper.net/knoppix  <http://knopper.net/knoppix>`_
 .. [#c3] `http://bioknoppix.hpcf.upr.edu <http://bioknoppix.hpcf.upr.edu>`_
 .. [#c4] `http://www.vigyaancd.org  <http://www.vigyaancd.org>`_
 .. [#c5] `http://www.bioslax.com <http://www.bioslax.com>`_
