sphinx_intermediate/commandlinetools.rst, before:


**********************
More Commandline Tools
**********************

Here is a quick list of useful commandline tools which will be used throughout the rest of the document.
Many of these tools have quite extensive funcionality and only a very limited part can be discussed here, 
so the reader is encouraged to read more about these using the links given in the in the :ref:`Links <Links>` 
section...

Command-line Tools
==================



GZIP
----
:index:`gzip <gzip>` is a compression/decompression tool.
When used on a file (without any parameters) it will compress it and replace the
file by a compressed version with the extension '.gz' attached:

 ::

  # ls textfile*
   textfile
  # gzip textfile
  # ls textfile*
   textfile.gz
 
To revert this / to uncompress, use the parameter ``-d``:

 ::

  # ls textfile*
   textfile.gz
  # gzip -d textfile
  # ls textfile*
   textfile
 
.. note:: As a convenience, on most Linux systems, a shellscript named ``gunzip`` exists which simply calls ``gzip -d``



TAR
----

:index:`tar <tar>` (tape archive) is a tool to handle archives. Initially it was created to combine
multiple files/directories to be written onto tape, it is now the standard tool to
collect files for distribution or archiving.

``tar`` stores the permissions of the files within an archive and also copies special files
(such as symlinks etc.), which makes it an ideal tool for archiving...
Usually tar is used in conjunction with a compression tool such as gzip to create a
compressed archive:

.. figure:: _static/targzip.png

    source: Th0msn80 (Wikipedia)

The most common command-line switches are:

=======  ===================================
Option:  Effect: 
=======  ===================================
-c       create an archive
-t       test an archive
-x       extract an archive
-z       use gzip compression
-f       filename filename of the archive
=======  ===================================

.. note:: Don't forget to specify the target filename. 
          It needs to follow the ``-f`` parameter. Although you can combine options like such: ``tar -czf archive.tar`` 
          the order matters, so ``tar -cfz archive.tar`` will *not* do what you want...



Creating an archive containing two files:

 ::

  # tar -cf archive.tar textfile1 textfile2

Listing the contents of an archive:

 ::

  # tar -tf archive.tar
   textfile1
   textfile2

Extracting an archive:

 ::

  # tar -xf archive.tar

Creating and extracting a compressed archive containing two files:

 ::

  # tar -czf archive.tar.gz textfile1 textfile2
  # tar -xzf archive.tar.gz


Creating a backup (eg. before doing something dangerous?): 

 ::

  # tar -czf /folder/containing/the/BACKUP.tgz /folder/you/want/to/backup


GREP
----

:index:`grep` finds lines matching a pattern in textfiles.

**Usage**: grep [options] pattern file(s)

 ::

  # grep -i ensembl P04637.txt

   DR Ensembl; ENST00000269305; ENSP00000269305; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000359597; ENSP00000352610; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000419024; ENSP00000402130; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000420246; ENSP00000391127; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000445888; ENSP00000391478; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000455263; ENSP00000398846; ENSG00000141510.


Useful options:

=======  ===================================
Option:  Effect: 
=======  ===================================
-v       Print lines that do not match
-i       Search case-insensitive
-l       List files with matching lines, not the lines itself
-L       List files without matches
-c       Print count of matching lines for each file
=======  ===================================

Count the number of fasta sequences (they start with a ">") in a file:

 ::

  # grep -c '>' twofiles.fasta
   2

List all files containing the term "Ensembl":

 ::

  # grep -l Ensembl *.txt
   P04062.txt
   P12931.txt

SED
---

:index:`sed` is a Stream EDitor, it modifies text (text can be a file or a pipe) on the fly.

*Usage*: '``sed command file``',

The most common usecases are:

===========================================  =====================
Usecase                                      Command:
===========================================  =====================
Substitute TEXT by REPLACEMENT:              's/TEXT/REPLACEMENT/'
Transliterate the characters x a, and y b:   'y/xy/ab/'
Print lines containing PATTERN:              '/PATTERN/p'
Delete lines containing PATTERN:             '/PATTERN/d'
===========================================  =====================



 ::

  # echo "This is text." | sed 's/text/replaced stuff/'
   This is replaced stuff.

By default, text substitution are performed only once per line. You need to add a
trailing 'g' option, to make the substitution 'global' ('s/TEXT/REPLACEMENT/g'),
meaning all occurrences in a line are substituted (not just the first in each line).
Note the difference:

 ::

  # echo "ACCAAGCATTGGAGGAATATCGTAGGTAAA" | sed 's/A/_/'
   _CCAAGCATTGGAGGAATATCGTAGGTAAA

  # echo "ACCAAGCATTGGAGGAATATCGTAGGTAAA" | sed 's/A/_/g'
   _CC__GC_TTGG_GG__T_TCGT_GGT___
 
When used on a file, sed prints the file to standard output, replacing text as it goes
along:

 ::

  # echo "This is text" > textfile
  # echo "This is even more text" >> textfile
  # sed 's/text/stuff/' textfile
   This is stuff
   This is even more stuff

sed can also be used to print certain lines (not replacing text) that match a pattern.
For this you leave out the leading 's' and just provide a pattern: '/PATTERN/p'. The
trailing letter determines, what sed should do with the text that matches the pattern
('p': print, 'd': delete)

 ::

  # sed '/more/p' textfile
   This is text
   This is even more text
   This is even more text

As sed by default prints each line, you see the line that matched the pattern,
printed twice. Use option '-n' to suppress default printing of lines.

 ::

  # sed -n '/more/p' textfile
   This is even more text

Delete lines matching the pattern:

 ::

  # sed '/more/d' textfile
   This is text

Multiple sed statements can be applied to the same input stream by prepending
each by option '-e' (edit):

 ::

  # sed -e 's/text/good stuff/' -e 's/This/That/' textfile
   That is good stuff
   That is even more good stuff

Normally, sed prints the text from a file to standard output. But you can also edit
files in place. Be careful - this will change the file! The '-i' (in-place editing) won't
print the output. As a safety measure, this option will ask for an extension that will
be used to rename the original file to. For instance, the following option '-i.bak'
will edit the file and rename the original file to textfile.bak:

 ::

  # sed -i.bak 's/text/stuff/' textfile
  # cat textfile
   This is stuff
   This is even more stuff
  # cat textfile.bak
   This is text
   This is even more text


AWK
---

:index:`awk` is more than just a command, it is a complete text processing language (the
name is an abbreviation of the author's names).
Each line of the input (file or pipe) is treated as a record and is broken into fields.
Generally, awk commands are of the form: ::

    awk condition { action }

where:

- condition is typically an expression
- action is a series of commands

If no condition is given, the action is applied to each line, otherwise just to the
lines that match the condition.

 ::

  # awk '{print}' textfile
   This is text
   This is even more text

  # awk '/more/ {print}' textfile
   This is even more text

awk reads each line of input and automatically splits the line into columns. These
columns can be addressed via $1, $2 and so on ($0 represents the whole line).
So an easy way to print or rearrange columns of text is:

 ::

  # echo "Bob likes Sue" | awk '{print $3, $2, $1}'
   Sue likes Bob

  # echo "Master Obi-Wan has lost a planet" | awk '{print $4,$5,$6,$1,$2,$3}'
   lost a planet Master Obi-Wan has

awk splits text by default on whitespace (spaces or tabs), which might not be ideal in all situations. To change the
field separator (FS), use option '-F' (remember to quote the field separator):

 ::

  # echo "field1,field2,field2" | awk -F',' '{print $2, $1}'
   field2 field1

Note two things here: First, the field separator is not printed, and second, if you
want to have space between the output fields, you actually need to separate them
by a comma or they will be catenated together...

 ::

  # echo "field1,field2,field2" | awk -F',' '{print $1 $2 $3}'
   field1field2field3

You can also combine the pattern matching and the column selection techniques:

 ::

  # awk '/more/ {print $3}' textfile
   even

awk really is powerful in filtering out columns, you can for instance print only
certain columns of certain lines. Here we print the third column of those lines
where the fourth column is 'more':

 ::

  # awk '$4=="more" {print $3}' textfile
   even

Note the double equal signs "==" to check for equality and note the quotes around
"more".
If you want to match a field, but not exactly, you can use '~' instead of '==':

 ::

  # awk '$4~"ore" {print $3}' textfile
   even

..
.. Sum column 1 of file.txt:
.. 
.. awk '{sum+=$1} END {print sum}' file.txt



Hints
-----

Quoting
^^^^^^^

In Programming it is often necessary to "glue together" certain words. Usually, a program or
the shell splits sentences by whitespace (space or tabulators) and treats each word
individually. In order to tell the computer that certain words belong together, you need to
"quote" them, using either single (') or double (") quotes. The difference between these two is
generally that within double quotes, variables will be expanded, while everything within
single quotes is treated as string literal.
When setting a variable, it doesn't matter which quotes you use:


 ::

  # MYVAR=This is set
   -bash: is: command not found

  # MYVAR='This is set'
  # echo $MYVAR
   This is set
  # MYVAR="This is set"
  # echo $MYVAR
   This is set

However, it does matter, when using (expanding) the variable:
Double quotes:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123
  # echo "the variable is $MYVAR"
   the variable is 123
  # echo "the variable is set" | sed "s/set/$MYVAR/"
   the variable is 123

Single quotes:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123
  # echo 'the variable is $MYVAR'
   the variable is $MYVAR
  # echo "the variable is set" | sed 's/set/$MYVAR/'
   the variable is $MYVAR

Weird things can happen when parsing data/text that contains quote characters:

 ::

  # MYVAR='Don't worry. It's ok.'; echo $MYVAR
   >
  # you need to press Ctrl-C to abort
  # MYVAR="Don't worry. It's ok."; echo $MYVAR
   Don't worry. It's ok.


Expanding and Escaping
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You already learned how to expand a variable such that its value is used instead of its name:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123
  # echo "the variable is $MYVAR"
   the variable is 123

"Escaping" a variable is the opposite, ensuring that the literal variable name is used instead of its value:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123

  # echo "the \$MYVAR variable is $MYVAR"
   the $MYVAR variable is 123

.. note:: The "escape character" is usually the backslash "``\``".

.. include:: exercises.rst

Commit message:

expand on variables; more examples

sphinx_intermediate/commandlinetools.rst, after:


**********************
More Commandline Tools
**********************

Here is a quick list of useful commandline tools which will be used throughout the rest of the document.
Many of these tools have quite extensive funcionality and only a very limited part can be discussed here, 
so the reader is encouraged to read more about these using the links given in the in the :ref:`Links <Links>` 
section...

Command-line Tools
==================



GZIP
----
:index:`gzip <gzip>` is a compression/decompression tool.
When used on a file (without any parameters) it will compress it and replace the
file by a compressed version with the extension '.gz' attached:

 ::

  # ls textfile*
   textfile
  # gzip textfile
  # ls textfile*
   textfile.gz
 
To revert this / to uncompress, use the parameter ``-d``:

 ::

  # ls textfile*
   textfile.gz
  # gzip -d textfile
  # ls textfile*
   textfile
 
.. note:: As a convenience, on most Linux systems, a shellscript named ``gunzip`` exists which simply calls ``gzip -d``



TAR
----

:index:`tar <tar>` (tape archive) is a tool to handle archives. Initially it was created to combine
multiple files/directories to be written onto tape, it is now the standard tool to
collect files for distribution or archiving.

``tar`` stores the permissions of the files within an archive and also copies special files
(such as symlinks etc.), which makes it an ideal tool for archiving...
Usually tar is used in conjunction with a compression tool such as gzip to create a
compressed archive:

.. figure:: _static/targzip.png

    source: Th0msn80 (Wikipedia)

The most common command-line switches are:

=======  ===================================
Option:  Effect: 
=======  ===================================
-c       create an archive
-t       test an archive
-x       extract an archive
-z       use gzip compression
-f       filename filename of the archive
=======  ===================================

.. note:: Don't forget to specify the target filename. 
          It needs to follow the ``-f`` parameter. Although you can combine options like such: ``tar -czf archive.tar`` 
          the order matters, so ``tar -cfz archive.tar`` will *not* do what you want...



Creating an archive containing two files:

 ::

  # tar -cf archive.tar textfile1 textfile2

Listing the contents of an archive:

 ::

  # tar -tf archive.tar
   textfile1
   textfile2

Extracting an archive:

 ::

  # tar -xf archive.tar

Creating and extracting a compressed archive containing two files:

 ::

  # tar -czf archive.tar.gz textfile1 textfile2
  # tar -xzf archive.tar.gz


Creating a backup (eg. before doing something dangerous?): 

 ::

  # tar -czf /folder/containing/the/BACKUP.tgz /folder/you/want/to/backup


GREP
----

:index:`grep` finds lines matching a pattern in textfiles.

**Usage**: grep [options] pattern file(s)

 ::

  # grep -i ensembl P04637.txt

   DR Ensembl; ENST00000269305; ENSP00000269305; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000359597; ENSP00000352610; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000419024; ENSP00000402130; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000420246; ENSP00000391127; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000445888; ENSP00000391478; ENSG00000141510.
   DR Ensembl; ENST00000455263; ENSP00000398846; ENSG00000141510.


Useful options:

=======  ===================================
Option:  Effect: 
=======  ===================================
-v       Print lines that do not match
-i       Search case-insensitive
-l       List files with matching lines, not the lines itself
-L       List files without matches
-c       Print count of matching lines for each file
=======  ===================================

Count the number of fasta sequences (they start with a ">") in a file:

 ::

  # grep -c '>' twofiles.fasta
   2

List all files containing the term "Ensembl":

 ::

  # grep -l Ensembl *.txt
   P04062.txt
   P12931.txt

SED
---

:index:`sed` is a Stream EDitor, it modifies text (text can be a file or a pipe) on the fly.

*Usage*: '``sed command file``',

The most common usecases are:

===========================================  =====================
Usecase                                      Command:
===========================================  =====================
Substitute TEXT by REPLACEMENT:              's/TEXT/REPLACEMENT/'
Transliterate the characters x a, and y b:   'y/xy/ab/'
Print lines containing PATTERN:              '/PATTERN/p'
Delete lines containing PATTERN:             '/PATTERN/d'
===========================================  =====================



 ::

  # echo "This is text." | sed 's/text/replaced stuff/'
   This is replaced stuff.

By default, text substitution are performed only once per line. You need to add a
trailing 'g' option, to make the substitution 'global' ('s/TEXT/REPLACEMENT/g'),
meaning all occurrences in a line are substituted (not just the first in each line).
Note the difference:

 ::

  # echo "ACCAAGCATTGGAGGAATATCGTAGGTAAA" | sed 's/A/_/'
   _CCAAGCATTGGAGGAATATCGTAGGTAAA

  # echo "ACCAAGCATTGGAGGAATATCGTAGGTAAA" | sed 's/A/_/g'
   _CC__GC_TTGG_GG__T_TCGT_GGT___
 
When used on a file, sed prints the file to standard output, replacing text as it goes
along:

 ::

  # echo "This is text" > textfile
  # echo "This is even more text" >> textfile
  # sed 's/text/stuff/' textfile
   This is stuff
   This is even more stuff

sed can also be used to print certain lines (not replacing text) that match a pattern.
For this you leave out the leading 's' and just provide a pattern: '/PATTERN/p'. The
trailing letter determines, what sed should do with the text that matches the pattern
('p': print, 'd': delete)

 ::

  # sed '/more/p' textfile
   This is text
   This is even more text
   This is even more text

As sed by default prints each line, you see the line that matched the pattern,
printed twice. Use option '-n' to suppress default printing of lines.

 ::

  # sed -n '/more/p' textfile
   This is even more text

Delete lines matching the pattern:

 ::

  # sed '/more/d' textfile
   This is text

Multiple sed statements can be applied to the same input stream by prepending
each by option '-e' (edit):

 ::

  # sed -e 's/text/good stuff/' -e 's/This/That/' textfile
   That is good stuff
   That is even more good stuff

Normally, sed prints the text from a file to standard output. But you can also edit
files in place. Be careful - this will change the file! The '-i' (in-place editing) won't
print the output. As a safety measure, this option will ask for an extension that will
be used to rename the original file to. For instance, the following option '-i.bak'
will edit the file and rename the original file to textfile.bak:

 ::

  # sed -i.bak 's/text/stuff/' textfile
  # cat textfile
   This is stuff
   This is even more stuff
  # cat textfile.bak
   This is text
   This is even more text


AWK
---

:index:`awk` is more than just a command, it is a complete text processing language (the
name is an abbreviation of the author's names).
Each line of the input (file or pipe) is treated as a record and is broken into fields.
Generally, awk commands are of the form: ::

    awk condition { action }

where:

- condition is typically an expression
- action is a series of commands

If no condition is given, the action is applied to each line, otherwise just to the
lines that match the condition.

 ::

  # awk '{print}' textfile
   This is text
   This is even more text

  # awk '/more/ {print}' textfile
   This is even more text

awk reads each line of input and automatically splits the line into columns. These
columns can be addressed via $1, $2 and so on ($0 represents the whole line).
So an easy way to print or rearrange columns of text is:

 ::

  # echo "Bob likes Sue" | awk '{print $3, $2, $1}'
   Sue likes Bob

  # echo "Master Obi-Wan has lost a planet" | awk '{print $4,$5,$6,$1,$2,$3}'
   lost a planet Master Obi-Wan has

awk splits text by default on whitespace (spaces or tabs), which might not be ideal in all situations. To change the
field separator (FS), use option '-F' (remember to quote the field separator):

 ::

  # echo "field1,field2,field2" | awk -F',' '{print $2, $1}'
   field2 field1

Note two things here: First, the field separator is not printed, and second, if you
want to have space between the output fields, you actually need to separate them
by a comma or they will be catenated together...

 ::

  # echo "field1,field2,field2" | awk -F',' '{print $1 $2 $3}'
   field1field2field3

You can also combine the pattern matching and the column selection techniques,
in this example we'll print only the third column of the lines matching the
pattern 'PDBsum' (case sensitive): 

 ::

  $ awk '/PDBsum/ {print $3}' P12931.txt
  1A07;
  1A08;
  1A09;
  1A1A;
  ...  


awk really is powerful in filtering out columns, you can for instance print only
certain columns of certain lines. Here we print the third column of those lines
where the second column is 'PDBsum':

 ::

  # awk '$2=="PDBsum;" {print $3}' P12931.txt
  1A07;
  1A08;
  1A09;
  1A1A;
  ...  


Note the double equal signs "==" to check for equality and note the quotes around
"PDBsum;".
If you want to match a field, but not exactly, you can use '~' instead of '==':

 ::

  # awk '$4~"sum" {print $3}' P12931.txt
  1A07;
  1A08;
  1A09;
  1A1A;
  ...  


..
.. Sum column 1 of file.txt:
.. 
.. awk '{sum+=$1} END {print sum}' file.txt



Hints
-----

Quoting
^^^^^^^

In Programming it is often necessary to "glue together" certain words. Usually, a program or
the shell splits sentences by whitespace (space or tabulators) and treats each word
individually. In order to tell the computer that certain words belong together, you need to
"quote" them, using either single (') or double (") quotes. The difference between these two is
generally that within double quotes, variables will be expanded, while everything within
single quotes is treated as string literal.
When setting a variable, it doesn't matter which quotes you use:


 ::

  # MYVAR=This is set
   -bash: is: command not found

  # MYVAR='This is set'
  # echo $MYVAR
   This is set
  # MYVAR="This is set"
  # echo $MYVAR
   This is set

However, it does matter, when using (expanding) the variable:
Double quotes:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123
  # echo "the variable is $MYVAR"
   the variable is 123
  # echo "the variable is set" | sed "s/set/$MYVAR/"
   the variable is 123

Single quotes:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123
  # echo 'the variable is $MYVAR'
   the variable is $MYVAR
  # echo "the variable is set" | sed 's/set/$MYVAR/'
   the variable is $MYVAR

Weird things can happen when parsing data/text that contains quote characters:

 ::

  # MYVAR='Don't worry. It's ok.'; echo $MYVAR
   >
  # you need to press Ctrl-C to abort
  # MYVAR="Don't worry. It's ok."; echo $MYVAR
   Don't worry. It's ok.


Expanding and Escaping
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You already learned how to expand a variable such that its value is used instead of its name:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123
  # echo "the variable is $MYVAR"
   the variable is 123

"Escaping" a variable is the opposite, ensuring that the literal variable name is used instead of its value:

 ::

  # export MYVAR=123

  # echo "the \$MYVAR variable is $MYVAR"
   the $MYVAR variable is 123

.. note:: The "escape character" is usually the backslash "``\``".

.. include:: exercises.rst
